First Aid Procedures
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author:  Emily Purdie, Health & Safety Officer
Impact Assessment Date:  June 2018
Date:  June 2018
 
 
Contents
1   Amendment Control sheet ……..………………………………………………………. 3
2     Introduction​4
3     Legal Requirements​4
4​First Aid Provision​5
5     Risk Assessment​5
6​Selection and Training of First Aid Personnel​5
7​ Provision of First Aid​6
8​ Records and Information​6
9    Equipment and Facilities​7
10     Roles and Responsibilities​9
11    First Aid Procedure​10
12  First-aid on Excursions​11
13   Calling the Emergency Services​11
14   Emergency Hospital Visits​12
15   Medical Information​12
16   Accident Data Records​13
Appendix 1: Flow Chart​14
Appendix 2: Recommended Contents for a Standard First Aid Box.​15
Appendix 3: Advice to First Aiders​16
 
 
 
1​Amendment Control Sheet
 
Revisions to these procedures will be issued as required. The revisions will quote an amendment number.  When the amendment has been actioned, the appropriate amendment number and amendment action date will be entered below and signed off by the Health and Safety Officer.
 
Copies of amendments will also be available on iShare
 
Amendment
Number
 
Signed as actioned
 
Date actioned
 
1
Review and partial rewrite of procedures - Issue 2
April 2017
2
Review and amendments of procedures
Issue 3
June 2018
3
 
 
4
 
 
5
 
 
 
6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2     Introduction
 
The Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations 1981 place a duty on the employer that all employees are informed of the arrangements that have been made for the provision of first aid. The purpose of this document is to detail how first aid is administered in the College.
 
 
3     Legal Requirements
 
The Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations 1981 require employers to provide adequate and appropriate equipment, facilities and personnel to enable first aid to be given to employees if they are injured or become ill at work.  
 
What is adequate depends on the circumstances in the workplace. This includes whether trained first aiders are needed, what should be included in the first aid box and if a first aid room is needed. Employers must carry out an assessment of first aid needs to determine this.
 
In some circumstances an ‘appointed person’ can be designated to call for medical assistance in the absence of a trained first aider. Such a person should be in a position to assess a situation, call an ambulance or medical assistance and take any other steps that seem to be necessary in the emergency.
 
According to the HSE advice, the minimum first aid provision on any work site is:
 
● A suitably stocked first aid box
● An appointed person to take charge of first aid arrangements
 
The HSE suggests that there should be sufficient first aid personnel and facilities available to:
 
● Provide immediate assistance to casualties, whether they are suffering from common injuries or illnesses, or conditions arising from more specific work-related hazards.
● Obtain medical or other professional assistance, e.g. call an ambulance.
 
The legislation says that first aiders must have undergone a training course in administering first aid at work and hold a current first aid at work certificate. There are two levels of training: A three or four day First Aid at Work course, and a one day Emergency First Aid at Work course.  
 
 
4​First Aid Provision
 
It is the policy of the College to provide first aid support if someone is injured or becomes unwell in College, or when involved in College-sponsored activities. A prime objective is that someone trained in basic first aid skills should be able to attend an incident within three minutes of help being requested.
 
 
5     Risk Assessment
It is the responsibility of the College Health and Safety Officer to ensure that a suitable, sufficient and up-to-date first aid risk assessment is maintained.  This will be carried out in cooperation with the first aid co-ordinator.
 
As with all risk assessments, the first aid assessment will be reviewed regularly and revised as necessary.  Any substantive changes in work practices, work equipment, etc. will be reviewed in order for the assessment to remain valid. The review will also include an assessment of the accident, near miss and ill health records.
 
 
6​Selection and Training of First Aid Personnel
 
The first aider will potentially need to react to difficult situations and should be capable of coping with an emergency situation along with having the ability to learn the skills necessary to carry out their function. They should also have to react to a situation with no prior notice. It is therefore necessary that they can leave their normal work immediately to deal with an emergency situation.
 
All staff selected for first aid posts will only be appointed as first aider when they have successfully completed an approved training course.  All trained first aiders will also attend a refresher course at least every 3 years to retain their certification.
 
The first aid team will meet annually or as required to update skills and discuss new legislation and ideas. These meetings will be organised and chaired by either the First Aid Co-ordinator or the Health and Safety Officer.
 
First Aiders will be allowed time to attend incidents and to attend training. They should have easy access to a first aid kit and disposable gloves. All on-duty first aiders are contactable by mobile phone; their numbers can be found on the First aid rota.
 
 
 
 
 
 
7​ Provision of First Aid
​On-duty first aiders can be contacted as follows:

Monday – Friday
8.30 am – 4.30 pm
Dial “0” for reception or EXT 7600 if reception telephone is busy.
4.30 pm  - 9.00 pm
Contact  Ext 7616 or Mobile no 07764572852  for Evening Technician and Duty Manager
9.00 pm – 7.00 am
College Closed
7.00 am  – 8:30 am
Call the Help desk Ext 7616
Saturday – Sunday
8.30 am – 5.30 pm Saturday

8.30 am – 4.30 pm Sunday
Contact the Evening Technician on Ext 7616 or Mobile no 07764572852
Weekend Cover Staff act as appointed person  
 
8​ Records and Information
All new staff, students and visitors to the College are provided with formal induction to first aid provision. Training includes:
● General organisation of first aid in the College
● Emergency phone numbers for obtaining first aid
● Actions required when first aid is required
 
Appropriate notices are displayed across the College displaying the location of first aid kits.  There is first aid kits located at the entrance of every building to be used by first aiders, they are tagged to prevent being accessed for general use.  Rooms holding a first aid kit for general use have an appropriate notice displaying the location of the first aid kit.
 
A register of designated first aiders is held by the First Aid Coordinator and HR. The register contains the following information:
● name of first aider;
● normal place of duty;
● list of all first aid and defibrillator qualifying dates;
● dates of first aid refresher training.
 
The first aid coordinator will keep the list up to date and ensure all relevant training courses are booked. The First Aid Co-ordinator will also arrange regular refresher training meetings with the first aid team.
 
All first aid boxes located in communal entrance areas are maintained by the Facilities help desk, they are replenished when items have been used or go out of date and records of dates of expiry are recorded along with the locations.
 
9   Equipment and Facilities
 
Defibrillator
A defibrillator machine is made available at the main reception.  All first aid personnel have been trained in its use and made aware of its location. Records are kept by first aid coordinator of staff training.

It should be pointed out that while training is always desirable, defibrillators are designed to be used by members of the public who are not trained. They are very effective at guiding the operator through the process of administering the shock and will not allow a shock to be given to a victim who does not require it.

First Aid Kits
First aid kits are located in all staff workrooms and first aid plaster boxes in  specialised areas such as:
● motor vehicle;
● carpentry and Joinery;
● catering areas;
● photography lab;
● science lab;
● hair and beauty salons
Specialised areas also have eyewash stations mounted on the wall as required.
Mobile first aid kits are made available for all external activities, kits are available in the First aid room.  When hiring the minibus for trips, a First aid kit is provided on the bus by the hire company.
These are located in the first aid room in Terrace D. Boxes should be sealed with a tag to prevent tampering and to indicate if they have been used.
The contents of first aid boxes should comply with Appendix 2. Sufficient materials should be to hand to cover the usual maximum occupancy of the area covered.
Food preparation areas
In commercial food preparation areas only detectable (blue) plasters should be available for use.

Eye wash bottles

Mains tap water is recommended when eye irrigation is necessary. Special eye wash bottles are only needed where this is not readily available. These should provide at least a litre of sterile water or sterile normal saline (0.9%) in sealed disposable containers Once the seal has been broken, the containers should not be kept for reuse. The container should not be used after the expiry date.

Spillage Kits

A kit for clearing up and disinfecting spillages of blood or other body fluids is available in the first aid room and in cleaners cupboards. Kits contain absorbent granules, a disinfectant (unless incorporated in the granules), gloves & a scoop for picking up the granules.
All materials contaminated by human blood or other body fluids should be disposed of appropriately.
Restocking
The Facilities Helpdesk carries out regular inspections of communal area first aid kits ensuring they are fully replenished with items at a suitable standard. Any open items or out of date items are removed and replaced.

Staff in workshops and staff rooms should record all usage of first aid kit materials and are responsible for replenishing as and when required.

First Aid Room

The first aid room is located in Pavillion D ground floor and is well equipped. It is unmanned but available for use by first aid staff. The contents of the room are suitable for rest, recovery and treatment. This room can also be used by nursing mothers.

First Aid Notices

First aid notices are posted on all health and safety notice boards situated at the entrances of each building. Notices are easily recognizable through use of standard first aid symbols and indicate where to contact first aid.
10  Roles and Responsibilities
Two trained first aid staff members should be on call out duty during the College working day. This can decrease to one after normal working hours. Those on first aid duty can be contacted with the mobile telephone number listed in the duty roster.

The First Aid Co-ordinator will lead the first aid team in the College and deal with the administration and control of first aiders and equipment and materials.

The roles and responsibilities of College staff are shown below.

First Aid Coordinator

● maintain an up-to-date duty rota;
● ensure first aid certificates are current;
● ensure appropriate training is provided;
● ensure first aid supplies are adequate;
● ensure defibrillator is maintained up to date, tested and available;
● maintain first aid room;
● provide updates for first aid team;
● ensure staff records, equipment and material records are maintained up to date;
● ensure refresher training is provided to all first aiders, and
● provide support to first aiders as required.
First Aid Personnel

● render first aid as required;
● report all incidents that require first aid attention to the Health and Safety Officer;
● keep first aid training and defibrillation certification up to date;
● make themselves available for duty when they are on the rota;
● inform Co-ordinator if unable to fulfil commitment;
● if they have to leave the campus during their duty period they inform reception;      
● provide support to other first aiders as required.
Facilities/Help desk Personnel

Facilities / Helpdesk staff will support all first aid emergencies if requested to do so. Support  may include:

● maintain first aid kits and plaster boxes
● wheelchair delivery;
● lifting assistance of a casualty;
● delivering defibrillator machine;
● removing bollards on “ambulance imminent” situation;
● escorting the ambulance to and from the scene of the accident, and  
● cover for the First Aid Co-ordinator in emergencies.
Employees

● contact reception if first aid is required dial “0” or “7600”;
● remain with a casualty until first aid assistance arrives, and  
● inform Centre Head/Manager of the emergency.
 
Reception
● Obtain information relating to the patient condition;
● location of patient;
● Contact first aiders on duty rota; and
● Contact Facilities if required to obtain extra assistance
Centre Head/Managers or nominated representative

● inform casualties next of kin if they are taken to hospital;
● collect casualties personal belongings for securing, and  
● Instigate an accident/incident investigation as required.
Health and Safety Officer

● report any RIDDOR occurrences to HSE;
● investigate all accidents/incidents, and ;
● report outcomes of investigations to senior management.
● Record first aid incidents
11  First Aid Procedure
If someone is injured, or becomes unwell and needs first aid, reception should be contacted (Dial “0” or “7600”). If the main reception cannot be contacted by telephone then a runner should be dispatched to reception for help. Staff member should remain with the casualty until help arrives.
Reception will contact the on-call first aider on their mobile phone. If they are unable to get them on the telephone then they should contact the second first aider on call. In the unlikely event that neither of the on call first aiders can be contacted then reception staff should look at the first aid rota list and call the next person on the list of first aiders.
The first aider attending the situation will assess the casualty, request assistance from other first aiders if necessary, administer first aid and stay with the casualty until they have recovered or arrangements for further care, if needed ,are made.  If an ambulance is to be called then the first aider should do this directly informing the ambulance service of the nature of emergency, status of casualty and location.
Once the ambulance has been called the first aider should relay this back to Facilities staff so they can prepare for the arrival of the ambulance.
If an ambulance has been called, Facilities staff will carry out the following actions:
● ensure bollards are removed;
● provide  support as required;
● safely assist with the ambulances arrival and departure.
     When the ambulance arrives, the ambulance team will take responsibility for the casualty and the College first aid staff member will remain and support the ambulance crew as required.
12  First-aid on Excursions

Where excursions take place, risk assessment should be carried out to identify the first aid requirements.  Where there may be a delay in obtaining help from emergency services it may be necessary for a fully trained qualified first aider to accompany the party.
First aid kits are available from the First aid room and should be taken on the trip if the risk assessment demonstrates its need.
13   Calling the Emergency Services
Calling the emergency services at the right time is paramount and the initial decision to call an ambulance has to be that of the first aider at the scene of the accident.

It is recommended you should call  ‘(9)999’ for an ambulance when it is obvious that
another person is seriously ill and in need of immediate emergency care.
 
Here are some examples of situations when you should call ‘999’:
 
● someone is unconscious;
● someone is bleeding a great deal;
● you think someone may have broken bones,
● someone has a deep laceration,
● someone has bad pains in their chest,
● someone is finding it difficult to breathe,
● if moving the victim would cause further injury,
● if the victim’s condition could become worse on the way to hospital.
If in doubt, the emergency services should be called.

Staff should not take an injured person to hospital in their own car. If they need to go to hospital and are unable to get there unassisted then the emergency services should be called.

14   Emergency Hospital Visits
If a victim of an accident requires hospital treatment then the following procedure should be followed:

The first aider should provide the Centre head/manager (if the victim was a student) or HR ( if the victim was a member of staff ) with the following information:

● name of casualty;
● where and when the accident happened;
● condition of the injured/ ill person;
● where the injured person has  been taken;
● next of kin details (if known).
Centre Head/Manager/HR should contact the next of kin and inform them of the situation. They should also collect the casualty’s personal belongings and secure them.
 
The First Aider must also complete an accident/incident HSF1 form and forward this to the Health and Safety Officer.

15   Medical Information
School Pupils

Parental/student and school permission must be granted before medical information is kept in relation to school students. The information should be kept to the minimum required and information stored securely with controlled access.

Any accident involving school students must be reported to the College/Schools liaison officer who in turn will ensure that the school is informed of the situation.

School students should not be allowed to leave the College unsupervised unless parental consent has been given. The school must be informed if a school student leaves the College.

16   Accident Data Records
On completion of all emergency situations, the first aid member of staff should complete an accident / Incident form HSF1 and forward it to the Health and Safety Officer. An accident form should be completed for all first aid attendances whether the problem is illness or accident. All recorded data should be kept secure.

The Health and Safety Officer will investigate the incident and decide on the most appropriate action. Then report the accident or incident to the HSE if necessary.

Failure in any of the first aid arrangements should be reported immediately to the Health and Safety Officer as a dangerous occurrence.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 1: Flow Chart
ACCIDENT / ILLNESS

 
Call Reception.

Dial “0”

Dial “7600”


 
 
 

 


 
 
Reception Calls First Aider

 

 
 
Reception on Standby for further Assistance

 
 


 
 
Calls for Ambulance

Informs Reception

 
First Aider assess situation

First Aider Calls Reception for assistance if required


 
 

 
 
Reception informs Facilities


 

 
 
First Aider Treats Casualty

 
Remove Bollards

Assist Ambulance to Area


 
 

 
 
​
 
Complete Accident form HSF1 (found on iShare staff zone/forms) and pass to Health and Safety Officer

 

 
 

 

 Appendix 2: Recommended Contents for a Standard First Aid Box.
 

Contents of British Standard Compliant (BS 8599-1)
First Aid Kits for the Workplace

Contents
Small 
Medium
Large
Travel
F/A guidance leaflet
1
1
1
1
Medium sterile dressing
4
6
8
1
Large sterile dressing
1
2
2
1
Triangular dressing
2
3
4
2
Safety pins
12
12
24
12
Eye dressing
2
3
4
 1
Adhesive dressings
40
60
 100
20
Sterile wet wipe
20
 30
40
 4
Microporous tape
1
1
1
 1
Nitrile gloves - pair
6
 9
 12
1
Face shield
 1
 2
3
 1
Foil blanket
1
2
3
1
Burn dressing 10 x 10cm
1
2
 2
1
Clothing shears
1
1
 1
1
Conforming bandage
 1
2
2
1
Finger dressing
2
3
 4
0
Sterile eyewash 250ml
 0
0
0
1
 
The size of the first aid box and its contents must be risk assessed for the activities and the number of staff in that area.
 List of special items that should be considered for inclusion in the first-aid room
● Disposable apron
● Additional blankets
● Cold packs
 
 
Adhesive plasters for catering
Plasters available in food preparation areas must be of the high visibility (blue) type.
 

 
Appendix 3: Advice to First Aiders
 
Responsibilities with regards to staff, students and authorised visitors
You are expected:
● To be available to attend to any member of staff or student requiring first aid.
● To assess the situation quickly and summon appropriate help.
● To identify, as far as possible, the injury or nature of the illness affecting a casualty.
● To give early, appropriate, and adequate treatment in a sensible order of priority
● To arrange for the removal of the casualty to hospital, to the care of a doctor, or home
● To remain with a casualty until handing him or her over to an appropriate person
● To make and pass on a report and give further help if required
● To only use first aid equipment that has been supplied by the College.
 
For all other persons:
● There is no legal obligation under the First Aid regulations for an employer to provide first aid facilities for the public.
● As a trained first aider you can, when at work, treat a member of the public if you feel it is safe to do so.
● When at work you can use any of the first aid equipment supplied for the workplace in the treatment of a member of the public.
 
Guidelines for first aiders
● Only treat a casualty if you feel it is safe to do so
● Whenever possible examine a casualty in the presence of a witness
● Introduce yourself and explain what you are doing at each stage.
● Whenever possible get the casualty to loosen his or her own clothing, remove jewellery, empty pockets, etc.
● Only remove jewellery or empty pockets if necessary and place items on the casualty’s person.
● Advise casualty on after care, i.e. only to wear sticking plaster for a few days, if wound becomes sore/ inflamed go to their GP.
● Limit your treatment to what is necessary
● Record details of all incidents in the accident / incident form.  If possible, do this in the presence of the casualty /witness. Include their name, and telephone number.
● Ensure that the reporting form is delivered to the Health and Safety Officer.

 
Equality Impact Assessment
Before carrying out an EIA, you should familiarise yourself with the College’s EIA Policy Statement and Guidance, along with further information and resources which are available on Serengeti
 
EIA covers strategies, policies, procedures, plans, provisions, criteria, functions, practices and activities, including decisions and the delivery of services, but will be referred to hereinafter as ‘policy/practice’.
 
Policy/Practice (name or brief description):  
 
 
First Aid Procedure
Reason for Equality Impact Asessment (choose from the following options):  
 
● Proposed new policy/practice
● Proposed change to an existing policy/practice
● Undertaking a review of an existing policy/practice
● Other (please give detail):  
•​Undertaking a review of an existing policy/practice
Person responsible for the policy area or practice:
 
Name:
 
Job title:
Emily Purdie
 
Health and Safety Officer
An Equality Impact Assessment must be carried out if the policy/practice:
 
● affects operational or strategic functions of the College
● is relevant to the promotion of equality (in terms of the Public Sector Equality Duty ‘needs’ as set out in the Policy and Guidance)
Why the EIA is being carried out
 
Changes have been made to the procedure
Equality Groups
 
Relevant to the Policy/Practice, identify which of the undernoted equality groups are impacted upon:
● Age
● Disability
● race (including ethnicity and nationality)
● religion or belief
● sex
● sexual orientation
● gender reassignment
● pregnancy and maternity
● marriage or civil partnership
● None
● Impacted
● None
 
 
● None
● None
● None
● None
 
● Impacted
 
● None
 
 
Record your assessment against the following statements:
 
Statement
Equality assessment
Detail the evidence of the needs of the identified equality groups and any gaps in information
Certain conditions may require first aid treatment to be applied in a slightly different matter than usual on someone with a disability
 
Pregnancy can results in medical complications, injury or other disorders so may require more instances of first aid
Will application of this policy/practice lead to discrimination (direct or indirect), harassment, victimisation, less favourable treatment for particular equality groups?
NO
If yes, how will the policy/practice  be changed to contribute to advancing equality of opportunity
 
 
State how this policy/practice will foster good relations:
Ensure that everyone is provided with and has access to first aid treatment
Will the policy/practice create any barriers for any other groups?  
 
no
If yes, how will the policy/practice  be changed to contribute to advancing equality of opportunity
 
Which equality groups or communities have been consulted in the development and review of this policy/practice?
none
 
Equality Impact Assessment Outcome
Select one of the four options below to indicate how the development/review of the policy/practice will be progressed and state the rationale for the decision.  (Delete the options that do not apply):
Option 1: No change required – the assessment is that the policy/practice is/will be robust.  
 
Monitoring
When will the policy/practice next be reviewed?
 
June 2021
Publication of EIA
Can this EIA be published in full, now?  Please state Yes or No  
 
If No – please specify when it may be published or indicate restrictions that apply:
 
Yes
Sign-off
 
EIA undertaken by
 
Name:                                                                          Date:      
 
Accepted by person responsible for the policy/practice named above:  
 
Name:                                                                          Date:  
 
 
 
Paula White
June 2018
 
 
 
 
 
Emily Purdie
June 2018
 
Retain a copy of this form for your own records and send a copy to ebrown@west-lothian.ac.uk